AI-300: Attacking Multi-Agent Systems and A2A Protocol
This course develops the skills needed to conduct offensive operations against AI-enabled enterprise systems. It enables learners to apply structured methodologies when operating in realistic, AI-driven environments.
4. Attacking Multi-Agent Systems & Agent-to-Agent (A2A) Protocol
In this Learning Module, we'll learn how to effectively attack multi-
agent systems and exploit the Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol. We'll begin
by understanding what multi-agent systems are, how they coordinate work
between specialized agents, and where security vulnerabilities emerge in
Next, we will focus on reconnaissance, covering how to
discover and enumerate A2A agents in the wild before exploitation.
After reconnaissance, we will cover exploitation techniques against
multiple types of A2A workflows. We will attack a Sales Analytics
platform to perform workflow integrity bypasses and inject malicious
content into generated files. We will also exploit database-driven
agents to execute operating system commands via SQL injection.
Finally, we will demonstrate protocol-level attacks applicable to any
A2A system, including rogue agent registration, Agent Card spoofing
via DNS manipulation, and indirect prompt injection.
In this Learning Module, we will cover the following Learning Units:
Multi-Agent Architecture Overview
4.1. Multi-Agent Architecture Overview
In this Learning Unit, we'll start by understanding how multi-agent
systems work and where security vulnerabilities emerge. Next, we'll
examine the various coordination patterns used by these systems and
examine the trust boundaries that attackers can exploit.
In this Learning Unit, we'll cover the following Learning Objectives:
Understand the different coordination patterns used in multi-agent
Identify trust boundaries between agents and the systems they interact
Map the attack surface of a multi-agent deployment
Multi-agent systems represent an evolution in AI deployment where
multiple specialized agents collaborate to accomplish complex tasks.
Rather than relying on a single monolithic model, these systems
distribute responsibilities across agents with distinct roles,
capabilities, and access permissions. This architectural pattern
introduces unique security challenges that differ significantly from
The shift toward multi-agent architectures has been driven
by several factors: the need for specialized expertise
where different agents excel at different tasks, scalability
requirements, and the desire to implement separation of concerns.
multi-agent systems can outperform single agents on complex reasoning
tasks by decomposing problems across specialized components.
Multi-agent systems are increasingly common in enterprise
environments, powering everything from customer support workflows to
automated security operations. As these systems handle sensitive data
and make autonomous decisions, understanding their security implications
becomes critical for red team assessments.
However, this distributed architecture dramatically expands the attack
surface. While single-agent systems expose interfaces for user input and
external tools, multi-agent architectures introduce
as a critical new attack surface. What were once internal
function calls within a monolith are now network requests between
distinct entities. This transition exposes authentication gaps, data
serialization vulnerabilities, and implicit trust relationships that
attackers can exploit to move laterally between agents.
Multi-agent systems employ various coordination patterns, each with
distinct security implications. The patterns described below are common
architectural topologies found in distributed systems and multi-agent
research, and they are not A2A-specific terminology, but represent how
A2A agents are typically deployed in practice.
(also called hub-and-spoke) uses a central
agent that manages task distribution to sub-agents. This creates a
single point of failure where compromising the orchestrator means
controlling the entire system. Attackers can also target sub-agents to
inject malicious outputs that influence orchestrator decisions.
Figure 1: Orchestrator Pattern Architecture
(mesh topology) allows agents to communicate
directly without a central coordinator. The primary security risk here
is trust propagation, where one compromised agent can influence all
peers. Attackers can abuse peer discovery mechanisms to inject rogue
Figure 2: Peer-to-Peer Pattern Architecture
(tree topology) uses layered agents with
supervisory relationships. This enables vertical privilege escalation
through crafted subordinate outputs. Attackers can impersonate
higher-level agents to issue unauthorized commands to lower-level
Figure 3: Hierarchical Pattern Architecture
(chain topology) involves sequential processing
where each agent's output feeds the next agent in the chain. This allows
payloads to persist through the entire chain and enables capability
jumping, where a payload injected at a low-privilege stage executes at a
Figure 4: Pipeline Pattern Architecture
Understanding these coordination patterns is essential for security
assessment, as each topology presents unique attack surfaces and trust
boundaries that adversaries can exploit.
Which coordination pattern creates a single point of failure where compromising one component means controlling the entire system?
In which pattern can a payload injected at a low-privilege stage execute at a high-privilege stage later in the workflow?
Which pattern's primary security risk is trust propagation, where one compromised agent can influence all other agents?
Which pattern enables vertical privilege escalation through crafted subordinate outputs and impersonation of higher-level agents?
Several frameworks enable multi-agent system development. Understanding
these frameworks helps identify implementation-specific vulnerabilities
graph-based orchestration with explicit state management. Security
concerns include state persistence that can expose sensitive
data, conditional routing that can be manipulated, and serialized
checkpoints that can be exploited.
Research enables conversation-driven multi-agent coordination. Code
execution agents present direct RCE vectors, group chat functionality
allows any agent to hijack conversations, and conversation history is
accessible to all participants.
uses role-based agent collaboration
with task delegation. Role definitions stored in prompts can be
overridden, memory systems can persist malicious content, and task
agent handoffs with function-based tools. It has minimal security
validation, weak handoff authentication, and context variables that can
carry injection payloads between agents.
for cross-vendor agent interoperability. Because it's a standard,
vulnerabilities affect all compliant implementations. The discovery
mechanism enables impersonation, and the parsing and validation logic
presents additional attack surface.
Which multi-agent framework presents direct RCE vectors through its code execution agents and allows any agent to hijack conversations via group chat functionality?
Which framework's security concerns include state persistence exposing sensitive data and serialized checkpoints that can be exploited?
Which lightweight framework has minimal security validation and context variables that can carry injection payloads between agents during handoffs?
Understanding trust boundaries is fundamental to identifying attack
vectors. Trust boundaries exist wherever data or control flows between
components with different privilege levels. The
attack, where a trusted component is tricked into misusing its
authority, is particularly relevant in multi-agent environments.
Confused deputy problem: Each agent may have different capabilities
and permissions. An attacker who can influence one agent's output can
potentially leverage the downstream agent's elevated privileges to
When examining inter-agent trust, we find that agents often process peer
outputs without validation, assuming upstream sanitization has already
occurred. Orchestrators execute actions based on sub-agent
recommendations without independent verification. Downstream agents
interpret upstream outputs as authoritative instructions rather than
untrusted input. Agents inherit and propagate permissions from peers
without explicit authorization checks.
Tool trust violations occur when agents trust tool outputs completely,
creating injection opportunities. Tool parameters are often built from
context containing attacker-controlled content. Different tools have
vastly different security implications, yet agents may treat file-read
and code-execution tools with equal trust.
System trust violations manifest when SQL injection through agents
accesses unauthorized data. Agents often hold elevated API keys that
users shouldn't be able to leverage directly. Agents running as service
accounts frequently have broader file system access than intended for
the user's actual privilege level.
What type of attack occurs when a trusted component is tricked into misusing its authority, and is particularly dangerous in multi-agent systems where agents have different capabilities and permissions?
In inter-agent trust violations, downstream agents often interpret upstream outputs as what, rather than treating them as untrusted input?
What type of trust violation occurs when tool parameters are built from context containing attacker-controlled content?
Why do agents running as service accounts pose a system trust risk?
A systematic approach to identifying attack vectors requires mapping all
entry, processing, and exit points in the multi-agent system.
Input vectors include user prompts, external files and URLs, API
responses, inter-agent messages, and webhooks. These can be exploited
through direct and indirect prompt injection, document injection, and
Processing vectors include prompt construction, tool selection,
parameter building, state management, and memory retrieval. Attackers
can exploit these through template injection, tool confusion, parameter
injection, state manipulation, and memory poisoning.
Output vectors include agent responses, tool invocations, state
modifications, external actions, and handoffs between agents. These
enable response injection, SSRF and SQL injection via tools, state
corruption, unauthorized actions, and handoff hijacking.
Persistence vectors include shared memory, conversation history,
configuration files, logs, and caches. Attackers can leverage memory
persistence attacks, history injection, configuration backdoors, and
cache poisoning to maintain access or influence future interactions.
Which category of attack vectors includes user prompts, external files and URLs, API responses, and inter-agent messages?
Template injection, tool confusion, and state manipulation are exploitation techniques for which category of attack vectors?
Which attack vector category enables SSRF, SQL injection via tools, and handoff hijacking?
What type of vectors allow attackers to maintain access or influence future interactions through techniques like memory persistence attacks and cache poisoning?
In this Learning Unit, we'll learn how to discover and enumerate A2A
multi-agent systems in the wild. Before we can exploit these systems, we
need to identify what agents exist, what capabilities they expose, and
how they communicate. We'll apply these techniques to the Sales
Analytics A2A platform that we'll attack in the next section.
In this Learning Unit, we'll cover the following Learning Objectives:
Discover A2A agents through Agent Card enumeration
Map the architecture and data flow of a multi-agent system
Identify attack surface by analyzing agent capabilities and tools
Our lab environment contains several independent A2A workflows spread
across multiple machines. These include a Sales Analytics platform with
coordinated agents for data retrieval, presentation generation, and
security scanning, as well as separate agent deployments for customer
data processing and inter-agent communication. Each workflow presents
its own attack surface, and we will target them individually throughout
Alongside the A2A infrastructure, the lab deploys an
(Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana)
for defensive monitoring. Before
we start probing the system, it is worth reviewing the detection rules
configured in the SIEM. This serves two purposes. As defenders, we
learn what visibility exists over agent behavior. As attackers, we
learn what rules we need to evade later during exploitation.
Let's start the lab and begin by exploring the detection rules.
We'll open a browser and navigate to
following active detection logic:
A2A Agent Response Content Differs from Baseline
Logs show routing to non-standard IPs (not internal or localhost)
A2A Enumeration Followed by Suspicious Activity
Multiple agent.json or endpoint registration events within short time window
Source Document Enumeration Attempt
Queries attempting to list documents, sources, or internal files
A2A Agent Registration Outside Business Hours
Agent registration events occurring outside 6 AM – 8 PM
Base64 Encoded Strings in User Data
Presence of long Base64-encoded strings in log messages
Suspicious Unicode Characters in Data
Zero-width or hidden Unicode characters detected in messages
LLM Response Contains Unrelated PII
SSNs, credit card numbers, or exfiltration keywords in responses
A2A Agent Card URL Modification Detected
Requests to /.well-known/agent.json from unauthorized IPs
DNS Response from Unauthorized Source
DNS answers originating from non-approved DNS servers
Prompt Injection Keywords in Data Field
Injection phrases such as "ignore previous instructions" or "admin mode"
A2A Agent TLS Certificate Fingerprint Changed
TLS certificate hash differs from known trusted fingerprints
A2A Traffic to Previously Unseen IP Address
HTTP traffic to new destination IPs on A2A service ports
Excessive Data Retrieval by Recently Registered Agent
High volume of routing activity to non-approved endpoints
A2A Agent Registration from Non-Whitelisted IP
Agent registration logs from unauthorized IP addresses
Dangerous XP_CmdShell Usage Detected
xp_cmdshell, EXEC xp_*, or union select patterns in logs
Security Scan Workflow Step Skipped
Logs indicating security scan bypass or skipped validation steps
Known LLM Jailbreak Phrases in Input
Known jailbreak phrases such as DAN mode or bypass safety
Unusual DNS Query Volume for A2A Hostnames
High volume of DNS queries for internal agent hostnames
Executable Instructions in Product Data
Product data containing executable-like instructions or SQL patterns
Hosts File Modification Detected
Modification events for /etc/hosts or Windows hosts file
Bulk Data Insertion from External Source
Multiple INSERT/UPDATE operations from non-application IPs
Duplicate Agent Capability Registration
Multiple endpoint registration events within short timeframe
Table 1 - A2A Rule Definitions and Detection Triggers
These rules cover all four attack categories we will explore: workflow
manipulation on the Sales platform, rogue agent registration, Agent
Card spoofing, and data poisoning. Each evasion section later in the
module will reference the specific rules it targets and explain how to
Your browser does not support the video tag.
With the detection landscape mapped, we can move on to identifying the
A2A services running in the environment. We will start with a standard
port scan against the Sales Analytics host from our Kali VM to
determine which services are exposed and where the agent endpoints
nmap -p- --min-rate 1000 192.168.50.25
Starting Nmap 7.95 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2026-01-21 11:31 EST
Nmap scan report for 192.168.50.25
Not shown: 65515 closed tcp ports (reset)
Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 82.99 seconds
Listing 1 - Nmap Full Port Scan Results
The scan reveals a mix of standard Windows services and several high
ports that stand out. Ports 8000-8003 and 8080 are highlighted because
they represent the A2A ecosystem:
port 8000 hosts the Orchestrator that coordinates workflow
ports 8001-8003 each run a specialized Agent (Sales, Security, and
port 8080 serves the Web Dashboard where users interact with the
The presence of MSSQL on port 1433 is also noteworthy, as it suggests
the agents may be backed by a database we can target later.
With the listening ports identified, our next step is to query each
agent endpoint and understand what capabilities they advertise.
Your browser does not support the video tag.
A2A agents advertise their capabilities through Agent Cards served at
mechanism, while useful for legitimate orchestration, provides
attackers with a roadmap of available functionality.
The Agent Card discovery endpoint is similar to other
/.well-known/openid-configuration
. During reconnaissance, always
check for A2A endpoints alongside traditional web enumeration.
When targeting a network, we can scan for A2A agents by probing common
ports for the Agent Card endpoint:
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8000/.well-known/agent.json | jq .
"description": "Central orchestrator that coordinates sales analysis and presentation generation workflows. Discovers and routes requests to specialized agents.",
"serviceEndpoint": "http://0.0.0.0:8000/a2a",
"stateTransitionHistory": false
"name": "AI Workflow Planning",
"description": "Use AI to plan and execute multi-agent workflows",
"description": "Discover and register available agents via their agent cards",
"name": "Strategic Analysis Enrichment",
"description": "Enrich analysis results with strategic business insights",
"model": "/home/ubuntu/models/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-AWQ",
Listing 2 - Discovering the Orchestrator Agent Card
The Agent Card reveals valuable information: the agent's purpose, its
URL, protocol version, and most importantly, its advertised skills. This
confirms this orchestrator coordinates a sales analytics workflow with
Your browser does not support the video tag.
To map the full extent of this workflow, let's enumerate the architecture
of the A2A-based sales analytics platform running on the internal server
at 192.168.50.25 as part of our engagement against Megacorp One.
First, we probe the known ports:
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8000/.well-known/agent.json | jq '{name, description}'
"description": "Central orchestrator that coordinates sales analysis and presentation generation workflows. Discovers and routes requests to specialized agents."
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8001/.well-known/agent.json | jq '{name, description}'
"name": "MSSQL Database Agent",
"description": "AI-powered SQL Server agent with server-wide access. Converts natural language to SQL (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE) across ALL databases, with automatic schema discovery, data analysis, anomaly detection, and forecasting capabilities."
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8002/.well-known/agent.json | jq '{name, description}'
"name": "Presentation Generator Agent",
"description": "AI-powered presentation generator that creates dynamic PowerPoint decks with charts, diagrams, tables, and narratives based on natural language prompts."
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8003/.well-known/agent.json | jq '{name, description}'
"name": "Security Link Scanner Agent",
"description": "Security agent that extracts hyperlinks from PowerPoint presentations and scans them against malware databases for threats."
curl -s http://192.168.50.25:8080/.well-known/agent.json | jq '{name, description}'
Listing 3 - Enumerating Sales Analytics Agents
because while the service is active and responding
with JSON (likely a standard 404 error), it does not return the valid Agent
) required by the A2A protocol. This
indicates it is an HTTP service but not an Agent — likely the