AI-300: Threat Modeling for AI-Enabled Targets
This course develops the skills needed to conduct offensive operations against AI-enabled enterprise systems. It enables learners to apply structured methodologies when operating in realistic, AI-driven environments.
10. Threat Modeling for AI-Enabled Targets
Every attack chain in this course, from prompt injection to
multi-agent pivots and supply chain compromise, began with choosing
to attack. That choice was guided by some understanding of the
target, whether deliberate or intuitive.
In this Learning Module, we'll formalize that instinct into a
Unlike a textbook decomposition where the full architecture is laid
out in advance, real engagements start with fragments: a scoping
document, a handful of DNS records, some job postings, and a lot of
assumptions. The threat model is not a product we build
engagement and then execute. It is a living artifact that evolves with
every piece of intelligence we collect, every assumption we validate
or discard, and every scope constraint that eliminates a theoretical
We will work through a simulated engagement against
Artificial Intelligence for IT Operations
platform. We will reconstruct its architecture from partial
information, form and track hypotheses, hit rules of engagement that
force us to abandon promising attack paths, and make time-pressured
decisions with incomplete data. The output is an
, the artifact that tells us which target to pursue next based
This Module contains the following Learning Units:
Reconstructing the Target from Partial Intelligence
architectural picture of an AI-enabled target from pre-engagement
artifacts and progressive reconnaissance. Tracking assumptions with
confidence ratings, validate or discard them as new information
arrives, and maintain an evolving component inventory mapped to
Trust Zones, Escalation Paths, and Engagement Planning
trust zone boundaries, trace escalation paths through them, apply
scope and rules of engagement as hard constraints, prioritize paths
under time pressure, and produce an actionable attack intelligence
10.1. Reconstructing the Target from Partial Intelligence
This Learning Unit covers the following Learning Objectives:
Reconstruct the architecture of an AI-enabled target from incomplete
Maintain an assumption register that tracks observations,
hypotheses, confidence levels, and validation status
Update the threat model iteratively as new intelligence confirms or
invalidates working assumptions
In a real engagement, nobody hands us the architecture diagram. We
reconstruct it from scoping documents, public repositories, DNS
records, job postings, cloud metadata, and whatever we can discover
during initial reconnaissance. Every component we identify starts as a
hypothesis with a confidence level. Some hypotheses survive testing.
Others collapse, and the threat model shifts underneath us.
This Learning Unit walks through that reconstruction process against
our target, Nexus AI. We'll start with what the client gave us and
what we can find publicly, then progressively build the picture as we
collect intelligence during the engagement.
Our engagement against Nexus AI begins with three artifacts: a scoping
document from the client, the results of passive
(OSINT) collection, and some minimal pre-engagement
technical documentation the client shared during kickoff. This is a
dedicated AI security assessment under the broader Megacorp One
program — the client has specifically carved out the Nexus AI platform
as an in-scope target for grey-box testing.
CLIENT:         Megacorp Financial Services
TARGET SYSTEM:  Nexus AI — AIOps platform (IT operations automation)
ENVIRONMENT:    Hybrid cloud (on-prem Kubernetes + AWS)
NETWORK ACCESS: Nexus AI is an internal platform, not internet-facing.
Client has provisioned a dedicated VPN tunnel into the
Nexus AI Kubernetes cluster network. Attack host
(10.10.40.2) is routed to the service subnet
(10.10.50.0/24) and whitelisted at the network
perimeter. No prior perimeter breach is required.
K8S ACCESS:     Read-only Kubernetes API token provided (grey-box).
Namespace: nexus-ai. Pod listing and secret read
permitted; no write access to cluster resources.
ENGAGEMENT TYPE: Grey-box assessment
DURATION:       10 business days
IN SCOPE:       Nexus AI platform and all directly connected components
OUT OF SCOPE:   Production financial trading systems, customer-facing
banking applications, Active Directory domain controllers
- No destructive actions against production databases
- Vector database poisoning permitted ONLY in designated staging
environment (Qdrant-staging, port :16333)
- No denial-of-service testing against any component
- No exfiltration of real customer PII (use synthetic test data)
- All tool invocations via MCP must be logged and reported to
the client's Blue Team POC within 24 hours
- Testing window: 08:00-20:00 local time, Monday-Friday
The network access clause is important. Nexus AI runs entirely inside
the corporate Kubernetes cluster, meaning there is no public endpoint.
The client gave us a VPN tunnel and a read-only Kubernetes API token,
which is standard for grey-box AI platform assessments where the
objective is to evaluate the platform's internal security posture. Our
on a dedicated VLAN routed into the
A LinkedIn search for "Nexus AI" at Megacorp Financial Services
surfaces several job postings and employee profiles.
One posting for a "Senior ML Platform Engineer" mentions experience
with MLflow, Qdrant, and Kubernetes.
A DevOps engineer's profile lists "HashiCorp Vault" and "MCP
A recently-closed GitHub issue on a public fork of an MCP server
— this repository is private, but the fork's README mentions three
Client-Provided Documentation (minimal):
During kickoff, the client shared a high-level data flow description:
"Alerts from monitoring systems flow into a central orchestrator,
which routes them to specialized agents for triage, remediation, and
security analysis. Agents consult a shared knowledge base for context
and execute actions through a central tool server".
This is everything we have so far: We have no architecture diagram, no
port list, and no component inventory. From this point, we'll build
out our model and try to get it to match reality as much as we can.
Before we can begin active reconnaissance, let's formalize what we
the target, its source, our confidence in it, and its current
validation status. This is the backbone of iterative threat modeling,
which prevents us from treating guesses as facts and ensures we know
exactly what needs verification.
Figure 1: Assumption Lifecycle State Diagram
Every hypothesis follows this lifecycle, from initial observation
through validation testing to either VALIDATED (drives attack
planning) or INVALIDATED (generates new hypotheses). The feedback loop
is what makes iterative threat modeling work.
Client doc mentions "central orchestrator"
Single orchestration component routes all tasks
Client doc mentions "specialized agents" for triage, remediation, security
At least 3 distinct agent services
Job posting references MLflow, Qdrant, Kubernetes
Platform uses MLflow for model registry, Qdrant for vector storage
DevOps profile mentions HashiCorp Vault
Credential management via Vault (not embedded secrets)
MCP Server exposes at least these three tools
Client doc mentions "shared knowledge base"
A RAG pipeline exists — likely backed by Qdrant (A-03)
No mention of authentication on vector DB
Qdrant may be unauthenticated within the cluster
MCP Server has access to AWS credentials (likely via Vault per A-04)
This is our initial assumption register built from pre-engagement
intelligence. Confidence levels reflect the reliability of the source,
not the probability of the hypothesis being correct.
Notice that A-07 has LOW confidence and is flagged as "absence
of evidence". The client documentation does not mention vector
database authentication — but that does not mean authentication is
absent. It means we have not seen evidence either way. This
distinction matters. LOW confidence assumptions drive
early in the engagement; they do not drive attack planning
until more confidence is warranted from additional evidence. Treating
the absence of information as confirmation of a vulnerability is one
of the most common mistakes in pre-engagement threat modeling.
The assumption register is a living document. Every time we collect
new intelligence - a port scan result, an API response, a
configuration file - we update it: promoting hypotheses to VALIDATED,
demoting them to INVALIDATED, adjusting confidence levels, and adding
new entries. Our threat model is only as good as the assumptions it
With the assumption register populated, we can begin active
reconnaissance within our testing window. Our first objective is
component discovery: confirming which services exist, what ports they
listen on, and how they interconnect.
An initial network sweep of the in-scope subnet reveals the following
nmap -sV -p- --open -T4 10.10.50.0/24
Starting Nmap 7.94SVN ( https://nmap.org ) at 2026-01-14 09:12 UTC
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.10
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9000/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus Orchestrator API v2.1)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.11
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9001/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus Triage Agent)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.12
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9002/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus Remediation Agent)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.13
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9003/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus Security Agent)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.14
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9004/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus Knowledge Agent)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.15
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
9005/tcp open  http     Uvicorn (Nexus MCP Server JSON-RPC)
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.20
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
6333/tcp open  http     Qdrant REST API 1.7.4
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.21
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
5000/tcp open  http     MLflow Tracking Server 2.9.2
Nmap scan report for 10.10.50.22
PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
8200/tcp open  http     Vault 1.15.4 (status: unsealed)
Service detection performed. 9 services scanned.
Nmap done: 256 IP addresses (9 hosts up) scanned in 47.83 seconds
Listing 1 - Service Discovery Results
We find nine distinct services across the in-scope subnet. Let's
immediately update the assumption register:
Four agents found (triage, remediation, security, knowledge) — exceeds our hypothesis of three
VALIDATED (updated: 4 agents, not 3)
— consistent with RAG pipeline hypothesis
Knowledge Agent is a separate service, not embedded in other agents
Table 2 - Assumption Register Update After Phase 2
agents, but found four. The Knowledge Agent is a standalone service,
which means it has its own network presence, its own attack surface,
and potentially its own access controls (or lack of). This
changes its offensive significance: a standalone knowledge service can
be queried directly, rather than only through the agents it supports.
Next, we'll test assumption A-07 — the unauthenticated vector database
curl -s http://10.10.50.20:6333/collections | jq '.result.collections[].name'
Listing 2 - Qdrant Collection Listing
Four collections are accessible without credentials. Assumption A-07
is now VALIDATED — a critical finding. We have direct, unauthenticated
read access to the vector database from within the agent network.
Before we start pulling data, we need to check the scoping document:
production Qdrant instance, but any
note this constraint, as it eliminates our ability to execute a
production knowledge poisoning attack, which would have been our
moment where theoretical threat modeling and real engagement planning
diverge. In an unconstrained analysis, poisoning the production vector
database is the most efficient escalation path — it requires no
authentication and influences every downstream agent. However, the RoE
prohibits this. A common mistake is to include RoE-prohibited paths in
the attack plan with a note saying "if the client approves". That is
not how most engagements work. The RoE is a hard constraint. Let's
remove the path from our active plan and redirect our efforts. The
path still belongs in the final report as a
database is unauthenticated), but it does not belong in our engagement
Continuing our enumeration, a query to the MCP Server's tool listing
endpoint confirms assumption A-05 and reveals additional detail:
curl -s http://10.10.50.15:9005/tools | jq '.tools[] | {name, description}'
"description": "Execute AWS CLI commands against the production environment",
"parameters": {"command": "string", "region": "string"}
"description": "Create ServiceNow incident tickets",
"parameters": {"title": "string", "severity": "int", "description": "string"}
"description": "Query Datadog metrics and logs",
"parameters": {"query": "string", "timeframe": "string"}
"description": "Rotate a secret in HashiCorp Vault",
"parameters": {"secret_path": "string"}
Listing 3 - MCP Server Tool Listing
The fourth tool is new intelligence. Its presence means the MCP Server
The description "Rotate a secret in HashiCorp Vault" is a write action
because it modifies vault secrets.
This changes our understanding of the MCP-to-Vault relationship: the
MCP Server's Vault credentials are scoped to include secret rotation,
not just retrieval. We can add a new assumption:
MCP Server's Vault AppRole has write access to secrets
MCP tool listing (A-05 validated + new tool)
Let's test this. The grey-box Kubernetes API token the client provided
gives us read access to secrets in the
query for agent credential material:
kubectl --token=$K8S_TOKEN get secrets -n nexus-ai \
-o jsonpath='{range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}'
Listing 4 - Kubernetes Secrets in the nexus-ai Namespace
We find that each agent has a dedicated token secret. A Vault AppRole
We now have five secrets — one token per agent and one Vault AppRole
credential for the MCP Server. Let's extract the agent tokens:
kubectl --token=$K8S_TOKEN get secret \
nexus-triage-agent-token -n nexus-ai \
-o jsonpath='{.data.token}' | base64 -d
eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJhZ2VudCI6InRyaWFn
ZSIsInNjb3BlIjpbInNub3dfY3JlYXRlX3RpY2tldCIsImRhdGFkb2dfcXV
Listing 5 - Extracting the Triage Agent Token from Kubernetes
The token is a JWT with agent identity and tool scope claims.
We now have all four agent tokens. This is a significant finding in
its own right: Kubernetes stores secrets as base64-encoded values, not
encrypted ones, and the grey-box API token the client provided gave us
sufficient access to read them.
With the tokens in hand, we'll test tool authorization:
curl -s http://10.10.50.15:9005/invoke -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...kT3xMnPxq8" \
-d '{"tool": "vault_rotate_secret",
"params": {"secret_path": "secret/nexus/test_canary"}}'
"message": "Agent triage not authorized for tool vault_rotate_secret"}
curl -s http://10.10.50.15:9005/invoke -X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-H "Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...Rj7vWmNk4A" \
-d '{"tool": "vault_rotate_secret",
"params": {"secret_path": "secret/nexus/test_canary"}}'
{"status": "success", "message": "Secret rotated",
Listing 6 - Tool Authorization Testing Using Extracted Kubernetes Tokens
The Triage Agent's token is rejected for
the Remediation Agent's token succeeds. We used a
to avoid touching production secrets.
Two findings emerge from this test. First, the MCP Server
enforce per-agent tool authorization: the Triage Agent cannot invoke
. This partially undermines our earlier
hypothesis about a flat credential model. Second, the Remediation
rotate Vault secrets, which means it can overwrite
existing credentials with attacker-controlled values. This is a
significantly more powerful capability than simply reading
Let's update the register again:
Remediation Agent's token authorizes
. Triage Agent's does not. MCP Server enforces per-agent tool scoping.
MCP Server has Vault access — confirmed. But access is
VALIDATED (revised from original hypothesis)
Remediation Agent can rotate secrets via
. We already hold this token (extracted from K8s secrets).
. We have not tested this — only
At TB-5, Vault sees only MCP Server identity (AppRole), not the requesting agent. Agent audit trail collapses at this boundary.
Table 4 - Assumption Register Update After Tool Authorization Testing
A-12b is critical. We know the Remediation Agent token works for
. The JWT scope claims we extracted suggest
per-tool scoping, but we deliberately avoided testing
during Phase 2 to limit our detection footprint. If the Remediation
different token — potentially one we do not hold yet.
A-12c matters for attribution. If Vault cannot distinguish which agent
triggered a request, then any MCP tool invocation using any valid
agent token will appear identical in Vault's audit log. This means our
use of the Remediation Agent's stolen token will not stand out
— but it may still be detectable at the MCP Server layer
if the MCP Server logs which token was used.
After Phase 2, our understanding of the target has matured. We can now
draw an architecture diagram, but it is